---
layout: post
title: Email (let's drop the hyphen)
date:   2018-12-22 00:00:00 +0100
permalink: /email
image: https://media.timeout.com/images/103166741/image.jpg
image_caption: Arrangement in Grey and Black No. 1, 1871 - James Abbott McNeill Whistler
rating: 1
---

> I don't even have an e-mail address. I have reached an age where my main purpose is not to receive messages.
>
> __Umberto Eco__, [quoted](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1995/06/26/of-eco-and-e-mail) in the New Yorker

Well, apologies in advance, I think. Sorry, but not really sorry. I guess I didn't have the time.

I usually overslept, or try to at least. The daughter of Lucifer, aka my dog, always starts menacing around 7:30, which means I can't sleep pass then. I wake up, have something for breakfast, brush my teeth— I'm the son of a dentist, after all, [like Mark](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Zuckerberg#Early_life)—, walk the dog, and off I go. On my way to work, I listen to podcasts, then I take the train, and [read for half an hour](/start-reading). When I get to work, my mobile gets turned off.

In order to get back home, I walk the previous paragraph backwards: turn my mobile, read on the train, and listen to podcasts until I reach home. By then, on average, I will have received around 90 emails. And by my own calculations, I expect to open most of them, and answer to one, at most. Sometimes none.

I'm not different from you; I'm swamped by email. Any email I'm exposed to is an opportunity to learn more, to meet new people, and sometimes both. But [managing my attention](/deep-work) implies having to separate what's wheat from what's chaff. Somedays, there's so much wheat I'm overwhelmed. Most days, though, emails get send to the bin like it's nobody's business.

So, if I didn't answer your email, it's probably not personal: It just didn't pass the filters. It may have a clickbait-y subject, and you should know by now [how much I hate clickbait](/writing-in-times-of-clickbait). It could also be too short, or too long. The devil is in the details. The key question, in any case, is: *if you were me, would you read it?*

In the Internet era, where companies like Facebook, Amazon, Netflix or Google have built empires on tailoring the content down to each individual, I'm impress that people could still regard mass, undifferentiated communication as something useful. Thus, any suspicion that I'm being sent an email that isn't specifically for me will make me not read it.

On a related note, I check email only a couple of times a day. I've turned off virtually all my mobile's notifications, and even if you nailed it, you should not expect an immediate response. If it's important, you'll eventually hear from me; if it's just urgent, well, urgent equals ephemeral, and ephemeral equals unimportant.

In the end, it all comes down to how someone values my time; those who value it as much as theirs will put the effort and from them I expect a well crafted email that has the structure of a hand-written letter. Those usually make my day. I'm looking forward to receive more of those. Is the email you're going to send me one of them?
