---
layout: post
title:  "Deep Work - Book Review"
date:   2018-09-07 15:00:00 +0100
categories: book-review
permalink: /2018/08/deep-work
---
> In his book [The Innovators](https://www.amazon.com/Innovators-Hackers-Geniuses-Created-Revolution/dp/1476708703), Walter Isaacson summarised Bill Gate's unique tendency toward depth as follows: _The one trait that differentiated [Gates from Allen] was focus. Allen's mind would flit between many ideas and passions, but Gates was a serial obsessor_.

[Deep Work](https://www.amazon.com/Deep-Work-Focused-Success-Distracted/dp/1455586692) is the *professional activities performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities to their limit*. The book I'm talking about today drills into what makes deep work valuable, in clear opposition to 'shallow work', which pervades our daily lives. Its author is Cal Newport, also author of [So Good they Can't Ignore You](https://www.amazon.com/Good-They-Cant-Ignore-You/dp/1455509124/ref=pd_sim_14_1?_encoding=UTF8&pd_rd_i=1455509124&pd_rd_r=62e5c976-ac8e-11e8-8742-1712fd196554&pd_rd_w=PYHhw&pd_rd_wg=MWemg&pf_rd_i=desktop-dp-sims&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_p=a180fdfb-b54e-4904-85ba-d852197d6c09&pf_rd_r=XW18WZ7NEDFFTYSAAZDV&pf_rd_s=desktop-dp-sims&pf_rd_t=40701&psc=1&refRID=XW18WZ7NEDFFTYSAAZDV). The book argues that it is the ability to do deep work what sets apart great people like Carl Jung, Mark Twain, Woody Allen, J.K. Rowling, and, of course, Bill Gates, and that *the ubiquity of deep work among influential individuals is important to emphasize because it stands in sharp contrast to the behavior of most modern knowledge workers*.

Like [the Unabomber's manifesto](http://editions-hache.com/essais/pdf/kaczynski2.pdf), this is one of those books that affect the way you look at the world, one of those books that you cannot unread once you go through the last page: the Internet is highly addictive, there is no "I know better", and it's undermining our ability to produce high quality work. 'Deep Work' is *not some nostalgic affectation of writers and early-twentieth-century philosophers*, but an enlightener: take a moment to understand that you're constantly distracted, but so is everyone else.

## Part 1: The Idea
In the first part of the book, the author develops what he calls "The Deep Work Hypothesis": *[T]he ability to perform deep work is becoming increasingly rare at exactly the same time it is becoming increasingly valuable in our economy*. He dedicates the first part of the book entirely to present arguments that will convince you that this hypothesis is true, like witnesses before the Grand Jury.

The first three witnesses are well known individuals that have achieved success in their work lives: Nate Silver, renowned by his election forecasts and his website [FiveThirtyEight.com](https://fivethirtyeight.com/); David Heinemeier Hansson, the creator of Ruby on Rails, one of the most famous Web development frameworks, *which currently provides the foundations for some of the Web's most popular destinations, including Twitter and Hulu* (also GitHub, Groupon and AirBnB); and John Doerr, a general partner in a VC firm who *helped fund many of the key companies fuelling the current technological revolution*. These are the three personifications of what the author would call stars of our era, because they embody three ways to achieve success in a world where, as intelligent machine improves, there is little room for those who are just average workers:

- The "high-skilled workers", like Nate Silver, who leverage the development of technologies like data analytics, have seen their more abstract reasoning rise in value over the last couple of years.

- The "superstars", represented by the ace programmer David Heinemeier Hansson, in which the advancement of high-speed data networks and collaboration tools have destroyed regionalism in many sectors of the knowledge work. It no longer makes sense for employers to confine themselves into local talent pool, because experts are just one email away.

> "Hearing a succession of mediocre singers does not add up to a single outstanding performance".
>
> -- __Sherwin Rosen__

The final case is, as always, those who have the money, represented by John Doerr. If quickly amassing capital is not within reach, the author lays down two core abilities for thriving in the New Economy:

1. Quickly master hard things - if you don't learn, you can't thrive.
2. Produce at an elite level in both quality and speed - if you don't produce, you won't thrive.

On the first one, to join the group of those who can work well with complicated topics, *requires that you hone your ability to master hard things*. This process of mastering hard things never ends. And just exposing kids to technology isn't enough: *Giving students iPads or allowing them to film homework assignments on YouTube prepares them for a high-tech economy about as much as playing with Hot Wheels would prepare them to thrive as auto mechanics*.

Now consider producing at elite level: mastering is not enough. You must do something with it. The ability that sets David Hansson apart is not his unique ability to program computers well, but his ability to unambiguously produce valuable and concrete results. Same for Nate Silver: he used to work with many statisticians during his time at Baseball Prospectus, but it was him alone who put the effort to adapt his analytical skills to election forecasting.

And, yes, you guessed, these two core abilities depend on your ability to perform deep work. The author relies on the works of [K. Anders Ericsson](http://projects.ict.usc.edu/itw/gel/EricssonDeliberatePracticePR93.pdf), who claims: *We agree that expert performance is qualitatively different from normal performance and even that expert performers have characteristics and abilities that are qualitatively different from or at least outside the range of those of normal adults. However, we deny that these differences are immutable, that is, due to innate talent. [...] Instead, we argue that the differences between expert performers and normal adults reflect a life-long period of deliberate effort to improve performance*.

Good Will Hunting is pronounced dead: Ericsson's line of research signals that to master a cognitively demanding task requires this specific form of practice, which consists of:

1. Focused attention on a specific skill.
2. Receiving feedback.

The first component is crucial: it emphasises that progress cannot exist alongside distraction, but instead requires uninterrupted concentration. The author mentions the way Adam Grant, a successful professor at Wharton School of Business, is able to produce an absurdly high amount of articles being published in major journals: he batches the important intellectual work into long, uninterrupted stretches, by stacking his teaching in one semester, and turning his attention to research during the rest of the year.

By consolidating his work into intense pulses, he leverages the intensity of focus, as opposed by the average Joe, who is prone to workaholism. The concept of attention residue, the idea that jumping from one task to another is not accompanied by completely focusing on the next task, but having some 'residue' left on the earlier one, helps explain __why intensity is much more important than time when it comes to productivity__.

Deep work is the type of work that optimises your performance.

Instead, organisations like Twitter or Facebook do not optimise for those who can thrive doing deep work. Jack Dorsey is the notable case. He represents a bunch of people who thrive in building successful companies and do not have the luxury of long periods of uninterrupted thinking.

In fact, they help explain why deep work is so rare in our society: they are the decision makers and, although most of the value of technology companies is produced by those who perform some form of deep work, manager's work is scattered in meetings, small talks and catch ups over the water cooler. Their work is shallow, and they make decisions around that mindset.

That's why Facebook unveiled in 2012 the plans for a new headquarters with "the largest open floor plan in the world", and why IBM's managers estimate that its employees send around 2.5 million instant messages each day.

Let's disabuse ourselves from the idea that managers are evil people who go for open offices because they find a weird sense of amusement in our incapacity to focus: they choose open offices because those are the sort of offices that are optimal for them. Same goes for working from home and any other kind of innovation in terms of working environment: if it's not optimal for the decision makers, it's simply not going to happen. The __real__ reason why managers can't let their employees do deep work is that control-freak mindset is still celebrated and encouraged among managers.

> "To do real good physics work, you do need absolute solid lengths of time... it needs a lot of concentration... if you have a job administrating anything, you don't have the time. So I have invented another myth for myself: that I'm irresponsible. I tell everyone I don't do anything. If anyone asks me to be on a committee for admissions, 'no', I tell them: 'I'm irresponsible".
>
> -- __Richard Feynman__

The author ends this section talking about the work of Csikszentmihalyi (whom we have spoken about [before](/2018/08/the-delights-of-science)). His research helped validate the theory that *the best moments [in life] usually occur when a person's body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something difficult and worthwhile*. Csikszentmihalyi calls this mental state __flow__, against the common assumption that relaxation is what makes people happy.

Deep work is an activity well suited to generate a flow state.

## Part 2: The Rules

> In an ideal world- one in which the true value of deep work is accepted and celebrated- we'd all have access to a work environment designed to help us extract as much value as possible from our brains. Unfortunately, this vision is far from our current reality
>

Up until this point, the author has focused on convincing you that deep work is valuable, rare, and meaningful. However, we find ourselves in distracting environments where shallow work is the easiest thing to do, whereas deep work is effectively impossible. A set of rules is what the author suggests that will help simulate a deep work environment and its effects in the otherwise distracted life.

## Work Deeply

First, we need to address the fact that people fight desires all day long: as Roy Baumeister summarised in his book [Willpower](https://www.amazon.com/Willpower-Rediscovering-Our-Greatest-Strength-ebook/dp/B005TIVK7A/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=): *Desire turned out to be the norm, not the exception*. Your will is not a manifestation of your personality, but like a tank that empties out.

The key, then, is to develop __routines and rituals__ to your working life designed to minimise the amount of willpower to maintain a deep level of focus.

### Choose a depth philosophy

Some people, like Donald Knuth, have become famous for many innovations in computer science, and among his peers, maintain an aura of infamy for not using email.

> I have been a happy man ever since January 1, 1990, when I no longer had an email address. I'd used email since about 1975, and it seems to me that 15 years of email is plenty for one lifetime. Email is a wonderful thing for people whose role in life is to be on top of things. But not for me; my role is to be on the bottom of things. What I do takes long hours of studying and uninterruptible concentration.
> -- Donald Knuth's website

This __monastic philosophy__ of deep work attempts to maximise deep efforts by eliminating shallow obligations; it prioritises a well-defined and highly valued professional goal. The science fiction writer Neal Stephenson even wrote an [essay](http://www.nealstephenson.com/why-i-am-a-bad-correspondent.html) on why he is so unaccessible. He sees that writing good novels is at odds with answering lots of emails and attending conferences, so he chose the former option.

This is obviously an extreme: the majority of us do not have the option to do this, as our relationship with our work is not as clearly linked to deep work as Knuth's and Stephenson's case. If you are someone whose contribution to the world is discrete, clear, and up to some point individualised, then this one is for you.

However, this is not the only option: the book indeed opens with the story of Carl Jung, who regularly retreated to a rustic house in the woods, but spent most of his time in Zurich, where he ran a busy clinical practice, was a regular in the coffeehouse, and attended many lectures in the universities around the city.

Jung's life in Zurich is in many ways similar to the digital-age knowledge worker, and that's why he belongs to the __bimodal philosophy__ of deep work. This philosophy asks *that you divide your time, dedicating some clearly defined stretches to deep pursuits and leaving the rest open*. This division of time can happen on multiple scales: deep work days within the week, or deep work seasons within the year. Adam Grant, mentioned several times along the book, schedules his time in a classic bimodality case:

> On the scale of the academic year, [Adam Grant] stacked his courses into one semester, so that he could focus the other on deep work. During these deep semesters he then applied the bimodal approach on the weekly scale. He would, perhaps once or twice a month, take a period of two to four days to become completely monastic. He would shut his door, put an out-of-office e-mail auto-responder on his e-mail, and work on his research without interruption. Outside of these deep sessions, Grant remained famously open and accessible.
> -- Cal Newport, Deep Work

People usually respect your right to become inaccessible if these periods are well defined and advertised, and that is the main reason why most knowledge workers might find this approach convenient.

If not, you can always try the __chain, or rhythmic, philosophy__, which argues that the easiest way to consistently do deep work is to transform them into a simple regular habit that you do every day.

1. Keep a calendar on your wall.
2. Every day that you produce deep work, cross the date with a big red X.
3. Don't break the chain.

Sounds familiar? This is what Alcoholics Anonymous do: don't think about doing what you want to do forever, just do it today. The mental effort needed to resist temptation *once* is of course less that thinking of yourself as not falling into it anymore.

If you are like me, this would do wonders: GitHub allows you to see how many days in a row you have committed code to any repository of yours. It piles up, day after day, and it builds motivation on you to *not break the chain*. That's how you start one day, commit code to the repository, and keep going on for weeks or months. At some point, it may even become addictive to keep going!

The decision between rhythmic and bimodal philosophies can come down to how your day is scheduled, and how much time can you allocate and stack for deep work.

The last one, in which you fit deep work wherever you can into your schedule, __journalist philosophy__, a nod to the fact that only some people are trained, like journalists, to shift into a writing mode on a moment's notice, and it's not for the deep work novice.

> When I start making typos, I know I'm getting tired. That's four hours or so. I've hit a point of diminishing returns. I wrap up for the day. Copy whatever I've done to disk and stash the disk in the glove compartment of my truck in case there's a fire and I have to run for it. I power down. It's three, three-thirty. The office is closed. How many pages have I produced? I don't care. Are they any good? I don't even think about it. All that matters is I've put in my time and hit it with all I've got. All that counts is that, for this day, for this session, I have overcome Resistance.
> -- Steven Pressfield, [War on Art](https://www.amazon.com/War-Art-Through-Creative-Battles/dp/1936891026/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=)

### Ritualise

To make the most out of your deep work sessions, build rituals of strictness and idiosyncrasy: great minds depend on their ability to go deep, systematically, and the rituals minimise the friction in this transition to depth.

There isn't a *right* way, but your ritual must answer the following questions:

1. Where you'll work and for how long.
2. How you'll work
3. How you'll support your work (coffee, exercise, ...)

### Make grand gestures

By leveraging a radical change to your normal environment, coupled with a significant investment of your time (really far from home) or money (renting an office of your own) you increase the perceived importance of the task. This boost in importance reduces your mind's instincts to procrastinate, injecting you with motivation and energy. The dominant force is the psychology of committing so seriously to the task at hand.

### Work with somebody

Working on your own is difficult. Imagine working with other people, then. Research has systematically busted the myth of brainstorming, but it hasn't dented its popularity, which is also at the core of open-offices that we discussed previously. Its major proposition comes from MIT's famed Building 20, which as noted by a [2012 New Yorker article](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/01/30/groupthink), was seen as a failure: thrown together as a temporary shelter during World War II, when the war ended it was kept as overflow space.

> The result was a mismatch of different departments sharing the low slung building. Because the building was cheaply constructed, these groups felt free to rearrange space as needed. [...] This haphazard combination of different disciplines, thrown together in a large reconfigurable building, led to chance encounters ad a spirit of inventiveness that generated breakthroughs at a fast pace, innovating in topics as diverse as Chomsky grammars, Loran navigational radars, and videogames.
> -- Cal Newport, Deep Work

It doesn't resemble a modern office plan; it was constructed using the standard layout of private offices connected to shared hallways. The key is not the open office plan, but a hub-and-spoke style arrangement: have the cake and eat it. This will make use of the *whiteboard effect*, where people try, with their deep work, to alleviate any blockers that the other parties in the team might have by means of a collective space or reference, such a whiteboard.

### Execute like a business

The 4DX framework is based on the fundamental premise that execution is more difficult than strategising.

1. Focus on the wildly important

Don't just say 'no' to distraction, say 'yes' to what you want to do.

2. Act on the Lead Measures

Measure the number of hours you spend doing deep work, rather than the work you eventually produce by going deep.

3. Keep a compelling score

*People play different when they're keeping score*.

4. Create a cadence of accountability

Do a retrospective on what went well, what didn't go so well, and what could've been improved.

### Be lazy

> I am not busy. I am the laziest ambitious person I know.
> -- Tim Kreider

On the research paper from Ericsson that we mentioned [earlier](http://projects.ict.usc.edu/itw/gel/EricssonDeliberatePracticePR93.pdf), he dedicates a section to reviewing what the literature has to say about an individual's capacity for cognitively demanding work. Ericsson notes that, for experts, and only them, the limit is south of four hours, and for novices can decrease to just one hour of intense focus. The implication is, of course, that the capacity for deep work on a given day is limited.

It follows that, by evening, you're beyond the point where you can continue to work deeply, hence deferring evening work is critical for you to recharge. You must maintain a strict endpoint to your workday.

To succeed with this strategy, you must accept:

- Once your workday shuts down, you can't allow any sort of professional work into your attention span.
- Once you are ready to shut down, you have to support it with a *shutdown ritual* at the end of the workday to avoid the [Zeigarnik effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zeigarnik_effect).

## Embrace Boredom

Have you checked your phone? Of course you have. This is the digital era, everyone is connected and constantly on their phones all day. A ridiculous era, I must say.

If you've ever been to London, I recommend that you go to a museum. The one you like the most, because they're all free. But if you go to the National Gallery, where you can contemplate van Eyck's [The Arnolfini portrait](https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/jan-van-eyck-the-arnolfini-portrait) or van Gogh's [Sunflowers](https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/vincent-van-gogh-sunflowers), do acknowledge the people around you at the precise moment that you turn your head into those paintings. Chances are, there's going to be someone taking out their camera or smartphone, taking a picture of the painting, and rushing onto the next one. This guy might be even you!

The problem with that approach is, you don't get to enjoy it. You're probably not going to look at that picture ever again (perhaps it took you a couple of seconds to post it on your feed), so in that case you have wasted your time there. Even worse: research by Clifford Nass reveals that constant attention switching online has a negative effect on your brain, as he summarised in [an interview](https://www.npr.org/2013/05/10/182861382/the-myth-of-multitasking?t=1536773183487).

> People who multitask all the time can't filter out irrelevancy. They can't manage working memory. they're chronically distracted.
> -- Clifford Nass

This leads to something that makes perfect sense: concentrating, like a muscle, must be trained. If you're one of those people who say "when I really have to concentrate, I turn off everything and I am laser-focused", well, you're wrong.

This rule builds on top of the previous one: you must ritualise your work so that deep work is at the core, but your ability to concentrate is something that must be trained in the same way that you want to train to perform better at your work. It simply states that both goes hand by hand.

### Take break from focus, instead of taking breaks from distractions.

Once you're wired for distractions, you crave it. There is no use for Internet sabbath, where breaks from electronic devices are periodically followed, in the same fashion that the Sabbath in the Hebrew Bible induces a period of quiet and reflection.

Instead of scheduling occasional breaks from distractions so you can focus, why not scheduling occasional breaks from focus to give in to distraction? The constant switching from distraction to focus is what Nass found to be bad for your brain, so you need to teach your mind how to tolerate the absence of novelty. On a personal note, the[Pomodoro technique](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique) is what works best for me: small blocks of 25 minutes that are spaced out by 5 minutes off. To succeed with deep work you must rewire your brain to be comfortable resisting distracting stimuli (even when you're standing in line; give in to your own thoughts!).

### When working, work deep

> Great. Good doesn't get you anywhere.
> -- Phil Knight

Give yourself hard deadlines, and do it all the time. Not for the sake of speed, but for you to remove any ounce of distraction and focus completely on what you're doing. If possible, commit publicly to a hard deadline, one that pushes you to your limit, but not beyond- you don't want to give up before you're started.

*At this point, there should be only one possible way to get the deep task on time: working with great intensity*.

### Mediate productively

I'm a fan of walking to work. I've been lucky enough to do during my time in London. The first time, I was working in the Hay's Gallery which, for those who don't know, is next to London Bridge and looking at the river Thames, and my commute imply crossing Tower Bridge daily. It was delightful. The second time, I had to walk across the Square Mile, starting at the Gherkin, passing under the Cheesegrater (they're both buildings, I swear), then Bank, St Paul's cathedral, and the Old Bailey. Every single day. I loved it, and thus I spent __a lot__ of time on my feet back then.

It also allowed me to think about my own things. There's something spiritual in walking rather than just waiting for the bus and being driven to work. There's time to reorganise your thoughts, and clear your mind, in a way that is not possible if you stand still.

The goal of productive meditation is to take a period in which you're occupied physically but not mentally and focus your attention on a single, well-defined problem. It takes advantages of periods that would otherwise be wasted and, if done right, *can actually increase your professional productivity*. On top of it, it builds on what we spoke about before regarding training your concentration muscles: by forcing you to resist distraction and return your attention repeatedly to a well-defined problem, it helps strengthen your concentration and sharpens it.

### Memorise a deck of cards

Some activities strengthen and sharpen our concentration more than others. If mindlessly scrolling down through our feed is at one end of the spectrum, mental athletics is definitely on the other end. Research led by [Henry Roediger]() concludes that a side effect in memory training is an improvement in your general ability to concentrate.
